# High-Availabilty-Distributed-file-storage-system

Brief project description

The company SecuriFile offers secure file storage to their customers using a system based on FTPS. Since their customers are no longer satisfied with the service SecuriFile is defining a new service in the form of a distributed file storage with high-availability.

A system administrator decides the initial number of servers in the distributed system and the number of file replicas maintained for each file. If there are n servers, then the numbers of replicas r can range from 0 (original file and zero replicas) to n-1 replicas (each server containing the file). All users obtain the IP address of the servers from an admin server (more about this below). The user software picks randomly (at the start of the program) which server they talk to.  When a user uploads a file, the file is stored on the randomly chosen server (we call this the origin server for this file). The origin server also computes a message digest (SHA-1, SHA-2 or SHA-3) for each uploaded file. The origin server tell the other servers it has the file. If a user accesses the file from one of the servers that does not have the files, it is redirected to the origin server.

If the number of replicas is r > 0, the uploaded file is copied to r random servers, other than the origin server. First of the r replica servers is assigned priority 1, the next one priority 2, and so on until the r:th server has priority r. The origin server informs all other servers where all replicas have been stored. When the user accesses the file (from a random server) it is directed to the origin server. If the random server is not available, the user picks another one from the list.  If the origin server is not available, the user is directed to the priority 1 server. If the priority 1 server is not available, the user is redirected to the priority 2 server (if one available), and so on. If the priority server list is exhausted the user is shown an error message. All user file access is logged to the admin server. It is requested that logging is done through syslog.

The description from the previous paragraphs indicates that servers know when one of them is down. This behaviour can be implemented by heartbeat (ping) messages between servers. Each servers regularly sends a message to each of the other servers. The recipient must acknowledge the reception of the message. If a recipient fails to do this multiple times in a row (for example, 3 times), the server is marked as down. The heartbeat messages are sent even when the server is down. If the server is back, a verification procedure takes place. Each of the other servers sends a challenge to the returning server. Each challenge contains a list of replica files and original files stored by the challenging server on the returning server. The returning server replies with a list of message digests, one for each file in the challenge. If the message digest check fails even for one file, the challenging server marks the returning server as failed, but continues to send heartbeat messages to it. Users are not allowed to access (read/write/create) files on failed or down servers. The administrator can take the server offline (so that other servers marks its status to down) , fix the failed checks manually and then put the server back online. At this point the verification procedure is restarted. If a verification procedure is interrupted (for example, because of a timeout) the server conducting verification marks the returning server as failed. The failed status switches to down eventually if the server is taken offline. All status changes, initiated challenges and result of the challenges is logged to the admin server through syslog facility. Each server status is updated to an SQL database on the admin server.

Each user defines a namespace on the server. The namespace can be implemented by assigning a unique root folder to each user (perhaps names after the user name). This way two users can upload identical files without conflict. Each user that uploads a file in his/hers own namespace becomes the owner of the file. The owner can decide which other users can have access to a owned file as well as delete the file. The selected users can be assigned master, editor or reader roles. If a user is master it can assign or remove access to the file from other users (except from the original owner). In addition, the master has the same permissions as editors and reader users. An editor can read as well as modify (but not delete) the file. Files can be modified by uploading a new file with the same path within the namespace. When a file is modified it must be locked on all servers so that multiple users cannot modify the same file simultaneously. Reader users can access the contents of the file, but not modify them. The information about users, files and access rights must be maintained in an SQL database on the admin server.

Obviously, it is expected that the file storage system must have a friendly graphical user interface (GUI) providing all necessities to list, upload and download files and folders, list users and assign or remove access rights to them. For each user, it must be possible to see in the GUI the number of files and the total volume owned by the user as well as a detailed list of owned files (there is no need to keep track of replicas). In addition, there should be continuously updated time-series plots that show the available and used storage on each server. Finally, the status of each server (running, down, failed) must be shown in the GUI. This GUI must retrieve all data from the SQL server (since searching across all servers creates high latencies in responding to user queries).

The admin server is used for storing server, file and user data in an SQL database. Logs are manages through the syslog facility. Each user trying to sign up for the service must authenticate himself against a user database maintained in the admin server. The authentication is based on user name (or e-mail address) and password. It's up to you to decide on a suitable way to add/remove users to the admin server: you can either provide a minimalistic GUI or offer a script. When an account is created an e-mail is sent to the owner of the account with login details and validity period for the account.

SecuriFile insists that all communication must be encrypted. They suggest that certificates should be used for each user as well as for the central server hosting the database. Certificates can be self-signed in the software release to the customer. Encryption features provided by well-known libraries such as OpenSSL/LibreSSL, libcurl or standard Java/Python libraries (for example, HttpsURLConnection, httplib.py, ssl.py)  are allowed to be used. It should be possible to restart the system with encryption disabled for debugging purposes.

Finally, SecuriFile requests that all interaction user-to-user and user-to-server be based on a RESTful API with JSON data encoding. Such an API should be easily testable by using HTTP(S) and the command-line utility curl, from the package libcurl.
